Department,course_code,course_name,credits,distribution,prerequisites,overlap_with,syllabus
Bioscience and Biomedical Engineering,BML101,Biology for Engineers,3,3-0-0,None,NA,Origin of life and Evolution; Water; Biological molecules: Proteins; DNA; RNA; Genes; Carbohydrates; Lipids; Enzymes and Introduction to metabolism; Nutrients; Introduction to Cells in Biology; Cellular processes; cell organelles and cell structure; Cell cycle; Culture growth; The Central Dogma; Chromatin; DNA,structure; replication; transcription and translation; Respiration and photosynthesis; Homeostasis; Basics of human physiology.
Bioscience and Biomedical Engineering,BML511,Physiology,2,2-0-0,None,NA,General and Nerve-muscle Physiology; Cardio-vascular Physiology; Respiratory Physiology; Renal Physiology and Acid-Base Balance; Endocrine & Reproductive Physiology; Gastro-Intestinal Physiology; Nervous System; Special Senses: Vision and Auditory Sense; Principles of Optics; signal transduction & visual pathway; functional anatomy of ear and mechanism of hearing.
Bioscience and Biomedical Engineering,BML512,Molecular Biology,3,3-0-0,None,BML101 (10%),Cell – Cell as a basic unit of life; structure and function. Types of cells; prokaryotic versus eukaryotic cell; their organization. Cell cycle; regulation of mitotic and meiosis cell division. Cell signaling; surface receptors; intracellular signaling and G-protein coupled receptors; Cell Organelles – different types; their organization and function; Chromosomes – Structure; nucleosome; chromatin; concept of genes and their organization and regulation. non-coding DNA; mobile DNA; organelle DNAs. (6 lectures) Cytoskeleton – Microtubules; actin filaments. Molecular motors; exocytosis and endocytosis; Replication – Replication in prokaryotes and eukaryotes; mechanism; regulation; double and single stranded DNA; telomerase. DNA,repair mechanism; Transcription – Mechanism in eukaryotes and prokaryotes. RNA,processing: poly-A capping and splicing. Heterogeneous nuclear RNA. Lac operon and concept of promoters; activators and repressors of transcription; Translation – Concept of genetic code; degeneracy and mechanism of protein synthesis: initiation; elongation and termination. Role of three types of RNAs in translation; Variants – Concept of reading frames; nonsense; missense; frameshift and point mutations. Genetic analyses of mutations; Molecular techniques – Recombinant DNA,technology; model organisms; DNA,cloning and characterization; genome wide analyses; gene structure; regulation and expression. Gene therapy. Inactivation of genes.
Bioscience and Biomedical Engineering,BML513,Biochemistry,2,2-0-0,None,BML101 (10%),Properties of water – Water as biological solvents; role of water for life on earth; physiological buffers; fitness of aqueous environment for living organisms; Henderson Hasselbach equations; Biomolecules – Nucleic acids; proteins; carbohydrates; lipids and vitamins – their structure; function and metabolism. Central dogma. Helical structure of DNA,and RNA; Protein – Different level of structure and folding; Ramachandran plot and its significant; intermolecular interactions. Glycoproteins and glycolipids. Structure determination – Experimental methods to identify biomolecular structures: NMR; Xray crystallography; cryo-electron microscopy; Enzymes kinetics – Michaelis-Menten kinetics; lock and key hypothesis; enzyme inhibitors. RNA,enzymes (ribozymes). Enzyme engineering and its applications; Membrane proteins – Lipid bilayer structure and their assembly. Membrane proteins; transporters; channels; receptors and GPCRs; Respiration – Glycolysis; TCA cycle and oxidative phosphorylation. Role of mitochondria; Photosynthesis – Light and dark reactions; photophosphorylation; pentose phosphate pathway.
Bioscience and Biomedical Engineering,BML551,Instrumentation in Biomedical Engineering,3,3-0-0,BML511,NA,Introduction to Biomedical Engineering and Instrumentation; Biomedical Sensors and Transducers; Bioelectric Signals and Electrodes; Biomedical Imaging Techniques; Biomedical Optics and Photonics; Biomechanics; Biomedical Signal Processing; Biofeedback and Neurofeedback; Bioinstrumentation for Therapeutics; Wearable Biomedical Sensors; Instrumentation for Gait Analysis and Motion Capture; Biomedical Instrumentation in Cardiology; Neurology; Respiratory Care; Anesthesia; Intensive Care; Radiology; Radiation Therapy; Surgical Applications; Rehabilitation; Medical robotics; Lasers in Medicine; Mechanical ventilators; Point-of-Care Devices; Nanotechnology; Regulations; Biocompatibility and Safety.
Bioscience and Biomedical Engineering,BMP581,Bioengineering Lab 1,1,0-0-2,None,NA,General physiology; RT PCR amplification of DNA; ELISA of blood insulin; microfluidics; Bacterial growth kinetics; Macromolecular simulations; SEM of biological samples; Cytotoxicity; MRI probe relaxivity studies; Confocal Microscope.
Bioscience and Biomedical Engineering,BMP582,Bioengineering Lab 2,1,0-0-2,None,NA,Study of biomedical equipment and devices; Nanotechnology in Biomedical Instrumentation; Lab-ona-Chip and Point-of-Care Devices; wearable sensor fabrication; Biomedical data analysis using computations; Signal processing; AI tools for biology.
Bioscience and Biomedical Engineering,BML611,Biomicrofluidics and,Lab-on-Chip 3,3-0-0,None,NA,Introduction to Biomicrofluidics; Engineers’ guide to the cell; Fluidics in living systems and mechanobiology; Pressure driven flows; Surface tension driven flows; Modulating surface tension; Lab on a CD; Introduction to Electro-kinetics. Fabrication of microfluidic devices; Flow control using pumps and valves; Droplet generation and manipulation; Microfluidic cell culture; On-chip cellular assay techniques; Microfluidics for understanding biology; Organ-on-a-chip; Lab-on-a-chip for genetic analysis; Microfluidic technology for monoclonal antibody production; Microelectronic-fabrication processes; paper-based microfluidics and its applications in diagnostics. Microfluidics for health care.
Bioscience and Biomedical Engineering,BML612,Bioinformatics,2,2-0-0,None,NA,Introduction – History; types of Biological data. Biological databases – Nucleic acid and Protein; Sequence and structure databases. Working on databases: NCBI; PDB; NDB; UniProt; Swiss-Prot GenBank; EMBL; DDBJ. Searching databases: BLAST; PDB; Uniprot. Literature databases: PubMed; PubMed Central. Sequence alignment – Local and global; pairwise and multiple; scoring alignment; working on EMBOSS and Clustal omega tools. Matrices and dynamic programming: Dot matrix; Smith Waterman and Needleman Wunsch algorithms. Phylogenetics – Concept of similarity; identity; homolog; ortholog; paralog and related terms; tree building. Protein Structures – Conserved elements: Concept of motif; domain and protein folds. Prediction methods.
Bioscience and Biomedical Engineering,BML613,Bionanotechnology,1,1-0-0,None,NA,Introduction to nanomaterials and bionanomaterials; nucleic acid nanotechnology and applications; synthesis and biofunctionalization of nanoparticles; RNA,interference for gene-knockdown; CRISPRCas9 for genomic engineering; protein nanotechnology and design methods; amyloids; antibodies and their applications ; nanopore technology; artificial organelles; and cells.
Bioscience and Biomedical Engineering,BML614,BioMEMS and Biosensors,3,3-0-0,None,BML611 (10%),MEMS Technology and BioMEMS Introduction BioMEMS: Device structures; analysis of structures to design and test of these devices and systems. Semiconductor sensors for physical measurements and Physico-chemical sensors integrable on silicon. Microfabrication processes: Fabrication and process integration of silicon based devices for biosensing applications. Cantilever Biosensors; their functioning and fabrication. Scaling laws. Piezoresistive cantilever fabrication. Introduction to Sensor; their classification and sensing principles; Introduction to biosensors; optical biosensors; electrochemical biosensors; semiconductor biosensors; examples of sensing of DNA; proteins and single-cell organisms; Surface Plasmon biosensors; etc. Microfluidic control with electrostatic and electromagnetic techniques; Micro-fluidics involving statics and dynamics of fluids in tubes and channels of micrometer size dimensions; Micro total analysis systems; Micromixing; etc. Lab-on-a-chip devices; Glucose sensors; Biosensor arrays and implantable devices; Electronic interface for biosensors; Rare cell detection; Microsurgical tools; microneedles and drug delivery Product development challenges/opportunities prevalent in the current Bio-sensors area.
Bioscience and Biomedical Engineering,BML615,Biomaterials Science and Engineering,3,3-0-0,None,BML512 (5%),Introduction to Biomaterials; Background history. Properties (Mechanical and Physicochemical); Resorb ability; biodegradation. Biofilm; Material characterization — Analytical instruments. Biological responses; compatibility; cytotoxicity; Proteins; Tissue and blood. Response Cell-biomaterial interaction. Animal trials (in vivo models). Metals types; classifications; applications. Polymers-types; classifications; applications. Biopolymers; Hydrogels. Drug delivery systems/encapsulation. Biomaterials for cardiovascular/ pulmonary/ ophthalmological applications. Biomaterials for cancer.
Bioscience and Biomedical Engineering,BML616,Bioanalytical Methods,3,3-0-0,None,NA,Introduction: Modern approaches in Bioanalysis and Bioassays. Spectroscopic techniques: UV-Visible spectroscopy; Fluorescence spectroscopy; IR spectroscopy; CD spectroscopy; and NMR and Mass spectroscopy/spectrometry. Microscopic Techniques: Light Microscopy; Fluorescence microscopy; atomic force microscope; Electron microscope; Scanning electron microscopy; Transmission Electron microscope. Application of microscope in analyzing biological samples. Electrophoretic Techniques: Electrophoresis; Principle; Design of horizontal and vertical gel electrophoresis apparatus; performing electrophoresis techniques; application of electrophoresis in analyzing macromolecules. Chromatographic Techniques Chromatographic techniques; Principles; Column chromatography; HPLC; TLC; Paper chromatography. Imaging Techniques: X-ray; MRI; PET; fluorescence; and ultrasound imaging techniques. 