Chemistry
CYL100 Applied Chemistry
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: NA
Electrochemical Systems: Electrochemical cells and EMF, Applications of EMF measurements, Nernst
Equation, Batteries, Fuel cell, corrosion and its control; Kinetics of Chemical Reactions and catalysis:
Reversible, consecutive and parallel reactions, Steady state approximation, and Chain reactions.
Physical adsorption, chemisorption, Freundlich’s expression, Langmuir adsorption isotherm, and
heterogeneous catalysis; Bonding Models in inorganic Chemistry: Molecular orbital theory, Valencebond theory, LCAO, and Crystal field theory; Coordination Chemistry: Coordination numbers, Chelate
effect, Coordination complexes and application, Bio-inorganic chemistry: Metal ions in Biological
systems, environmental aspects of Metals, Organometallic chemistry, 18 electron rules, Industrially
relevant chemical reactions and mechanism, Meallic-lithium, sodium and its compounds and their
energy storage applications; Engineering materials and Polymer Chemistry: Glass, ceramics,
refractory, composites, magnetic materials, Polymer, Properties, Polymer processing, Industrial
polymers, conducting polymers;
Natural Products and Biomolecules: Amino acids/nucleic
acids/proteins/lipids, Enzymes, Vitamins, Biomacromolecules, and Solid phase synthesis; Fuels and
Combustion: Properties of fuels, Calorific value, Petroleum and petrochemicals, biofuels.

CYL101 Environmental Studies
1 Credits (1-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: NA
Understanding our environment: atmosphere composition and behaviour, temperature and pressure
profile of atmosphere, Atmospheric Photochemistry: Electromagnetic radiations, kinetics of thermal
and photochemical processes, Reactions in the upper atmosphere, photo processes in the
troposphere, photochemical smog, photosynthesis, Ozone chemistry, brief overviews of ozone
depletion and atmospheric pollutants. Air pollution: Standards, effect of air pollutants, origin and fate
of air pollutants, atmospheric dispersion. Global warming: greenhouse gases, results of global
warming, Principle and applications, green chemical industrial process, sustainable fuel for
automobiles and power generation. Water pollution: Chemistry in aqueous media; Chemical and
physical reactions in the water environment; Major contaminant groups and their natural pathways for
removal from lakes, rivers and oceans. Soil pollution: Groundwater and subsurface contamination, Soil
profiles, Acid-base and ion exchange reactions in soils, Fertilizers, wastes and pollutants in soil.
Organic and Inorganic chemicals in environment: Ecosystem, flow of energy and nutrient cycles,
sustainability, toxicity, polychlorinated hydrocarbons like DDT, polymers, detergents. impact on
environment.

CYP102 Chemistry Lab
1.5 Credits (0-0-3)
Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: NA

Indicative Experiments; Synthesis of drugs (Paracetamol and Aspirin); Analysis of Organic Compound;
Estimation of Phenol; Estimation of Copper in Brassy Determination of Hardness of Water by EDTA
titration; Synthesis of potash alum from scrap aluminium (recycling of aluminium waste); Reaction
Kinetics (Ester hydrolysis); Red-ox titration; Acid Strength in Citrus Fruit juice by using pH meter and
conductivity meter; Estimation of Cu in brass by colourimetric method.

CYL400 Chemical Kinetics and Surface Science
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: CYL100 - 10%
Introduction to chemical Kinetics, Chain reactions (free radical reaction, polymerization), Enzyme
reaction, Inhibition kinetics; Temperature dependence of reaction rate: Linear and non-linear Arrhenius
equation, Interpretation of Arrhenius parameters Various theories of unimolecular reactions, Potential
energy surfaces for bimolecular reactions; Collision theory. Transition state theory,
Activation/thermodynamic parameters, Erying equation; Kinetics in the excited state: Jablonski
diagram, Kinetics of Unimolecular and bimolecular photophysical and photochemical processes,
Quantum yield calculation, Excited state lifetime-quenching constant, Resonance energy transfer rates
(RET), Rate and efficiency of RET; Dynamics of electron transfer, Solvent reorganization energy,
Marcus theory of electron transfer; Importance of interfaces (solid-solid, solid-gas), adsorption
isotherms, surface charge and zeta potentials, surface tension; Surface of nanostructured materials,
Organic solid state materials, fullerenes, carbon nanotubes and graphene, Surface reactions,
Introduction to surface characterization techniques (SEM, XPS, UPS, LEED).

CYL401 Coordination Chemistry
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: NA
Introduction to coordination chemistry: The central atom and the ligand, bonding, coordinate (dative)
bond, historical background, coordination compounds in chemistry and beyond, basic nomenclature.
Ligand types: Classification of ligands, denticity and hapticity, representative ligand families; Transition
Metal Chemistry: Properties of transition metal ligand complexes - geometry, coordination number,
isomerism, thermodynamic stability, chelate and macrocyclic effect, metal-metal bonds, clusters;
Bonding in coordination compounds: Lewis acidity and basicity (donors and acceptors), Crystal Field
Theory, Ligand Field Theory, Sigma and Pi Orbitals, limitations of bonding theories, d-orbital splitting,
low spin and high spin complexes,Term Symbols, microstates, R-S coupling, Orgel and Tanabe
Sugano Diagrams, CFSE for d0 to d10 systems, pairing energy, Applications of CFT and Spinels,
Magnetic properties of complexes, J-T distortion, Spin Crossover; Selection rules of electronic
transition: Laporte Forbidden Rule, Spin Selection Rule Charge Transfer Spectra (CT), different CT
transitions, molecular orbital (MO) theory of small molecules; Reactivity of complexes: Substitution in
Oh and Square Planner complexes, Thermodynamics and kinetics, stability and lability of complexes,
trans-effect and trans-influence, conjugate base mechanism, racemization, oxidative addition and
reductive elimination, steric and electronic factors, redox reactions; Electron transfer reaction: inner
sphere and outer sphere mechanism, mechanism of redox reactions, Marcus theory; Photosubstitution
and photo redox reactions of Cr, Co, and Ru compounds.

CYL500 Quantum Chemistry

3 Credits (3-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: NA
Why and how quantum mechanics came into existence; Difficulties with classical theory; Black-body
radiation, photoelectric effect, Bohr’s theory of hydrogen atom, wave-particle duality, de Broglie’s idea,
double-slit experiment, concept of matter-wave, group and phase velocity, Heisenberg Uncertainty
principle; Postulates of quantum mechanics – meaning of wavefunction, operators, eigenvalue
problems, Time- dependent and time-independent Schrödinger equation; Model problems – the
particle-in-a-box, the harmonic oscillator, and molecular vibration and normal modes, Angular
momentum; Hydrogen atom, concept of atomic orbitals, probabilities and electron- density distribution,
Born-Oppenheimer approximation – limitations and applications; Molecular orbitals from valence bond
and molecular orbital theory; Concept of LCAO and introduction to basis- set; Concepts in
computational chemistry; Hartree-Fock Self-Consistent Field (SCF) theory and concept of electron
correlation and variational principle; Electron spin and the Pauli principle; Relativity in chemistry – Brief
introduction to relativistic quantum mechanics.

CYL501 Stereochemistry and Reaction Mechanism
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: NA
Stereochemistry: Introduction to molecular symmetry and point groups. Topicity and
prostereoisomerism, nomenclature of stereotopic ligands and faces, stereoheterotopic ligands. Basic
terminology: threo and erythro isomers, endo- and exo- compounds, atropisomerism. Centre of
chirality, assignment of absolute stereochemistry, CIP rules. Axial chirality (biaryls, spiro compounds,
adamentoids, allenes, hemispiranes/alkylidene cycloalkanes and catenanes), planar chirality
(cyclophanes, metallocenes and transcycloalkene) and helicity, descriptors for absolute
stereochemistry
Conformational analysis: acyclic systems, cyclic systems, cyclohexane and decalins, conformation and
reactivity with examples from molecular rearrangements, neighbouring group participation, elimination
reactions, formation and cleavage of epoxides, quantitative correlation between conformation and
reactivity.
Stereoselectivity: Classification, terminology such as stereomutation, stereoablation, and
stereodiscordance, principle of stereoselectivity, examples of diastereoselectivity and
enantioselectivity. Stereoselectivity using chiral reagent, chiral catalysts, chiral auxiliary and chiral
substrates. Kinetic resolution, parallel kinetic resolution, dynamic kinetic resolution. Circular dichroism,
ORD, cotton effect, application of ORD and CD in steriods, examples illustrating the usefulness of
Cotton effect.
Reaction mechanisms: Nucleophilic substitution, various types, stability and reactivity of carbocations,
nucleophilicity and basicity, neighbouring group participation and rearrangements, steric effects in
substitution reactions, classical and non-classical carbocations. Umpolung chemistry with emphasis
on thiamine, triazolium, cyanohydrins, metallophosphites and dithianes. Cyclization in organic
chemistry, anionic and cationic cascades cyclization, radical induced cyclization, ring-closing
metathesis, organocatalysts in cyclization.
Rearrangements: neighboring group participation, ring expansion, carbocation, pinacol, dienonephenol, benzilic, Favorskii, Baeyer-Villiger and Beckmann rearrangements.

CYP502 Organic and Inorganic Laboratory
3 Credits (0-0-6)
Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: NA
Inorganic Lab: Synthesis and characterization of coordination compounds (2 experiments); Study their
magnetic moment. Synthesis and characterization of oraganometallic compounds (2 experiments).
Catalytic reaction and techniques; Purification and separation techniques (1 experiment),
Characterization through analytical techniques, Qualitative determination of compounds, molecules
and elements, Quantitative estimation of compounds, molecules and elements.
Organic Lab: Separation of an Unknown Mixture: Acid-Base Solvent Extraction. Nitration Reaction:
Thin layer chromatography and column chromatography. Grignard Reaction: Preparation of a grignard
reagent, synthesis of triphenylmethanol. Wittig Reaction: Synthesis of alkene from aldehyde. Synthesis
of organic (bio)molecules via acid/amine coupling and other coupling strategies and their molecular
characterization using different analytical tools, target oriented synthesis of (bio)macromolecules and
their molecular characterization, investigation of the physicochemical properties of the synthesized
(bio)(macro)molecules.

CYP503 Physical and Computational Chemistry Lab
3 Credits (0-0-6)
Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: NA
Study of charge transfer complexes using colorimetric method; Study of fluorescence quenching;
Phase behaviour studies; Reaction kinetics study (spectroscopic and polarometric); Study of
intermolecular hydrogen bonding; Nanomaterial synthesis and characterizations; Denaturation Studies
of biomolecules; Programming, computing platforms, computer simulations; electronic and molecular
structure calculations.

CYL504 Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: MEL211 (15-20%); MML201 (15-20%)
Why study statistical mechanics? Introduction to Thermodynamics; Equilibrium Thermodynamics:
Thermodynamic Equilibrium state, properties of ideal gases and how they differ from real gases, laws
of thermodynamics, thermodynamic potentials, concepts of state and path functions; work and heat as
path functions and internal energy as state function, phase diagram, thermodynamic description of
various types of processes; Maxwell’s relations; spontaneity and equilibria; Temperature and pressure
dependence of thermodynamic quantities; Le Chatelier’s principle; Basic concepts and postulates of
statistical mechanics; Ensembles: microcanonical, canonical and grand canonical ensembles,
applications of ensembles, thermostat, Barostat, calculation of different thermodynamic quantities such
as average pressure, average energy. Partition functions and distributions, canonical and grand
canonical partition functions, phase space, fluctuations; Boltzmann, Fermi-Dirac and Bose-Einstein
distributions. Canonical partition function in terms of molecular partition function of non-interacting
particles, Translational, rotational and vibrational partition functions; Temperature dependence of the
second virial coefficient. Thermodynamics of solids - Einstein and Debye models. T3 dependence of

heat capacity of solids at low temperatures Fermi function, Fermi energy, free electron model and
density of states, chemical potential of conduction electrons; Introduction to computer simulation
methods in statistical mechanics. ergodicity, random numbers, Monte Carlo methods, Molecular
Dynamics, constant temperature MD.

CYL505 Organic Reactions and Reagents
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: NA
A brief introduction to substitution, elimination, addition, oxidation, reduction, rearrangement and
pericyclic reactions. Functional group transformations: alcohols to alkylating agents, Mitsunobu and
related reactions, introduction of functional groups by nucleophilic substitution at saturated carbon,
nucleophilic cleavage of C-O bonds in ethers and esters and interconversion of carboxylic acid
derivatives.
Oxidation: Metal based oxidizing reagents: A review and detailed discussion of chromium, manganese,
ruthenium, silver and other metal based reagents. Non-metal based oxidizing reagents: DMSO,
peroxide, peracid and oxygen based oxidation. Miscellaneous oxidizing reagents like IBX, DMP, CAN,
DDQ, periodate etc.
Reduction: Homogeneous and heterogeneous; Discussion on borane based racemic and chiral
reagents, hydrogenations aluminium, tin, silicon based reducing agents. Dissolving metal reductions.
Selectivity and protecting groups: Illustration of chemoselectivity, regioselectivity and stereoselectivity
with examples; protecting groups for alcohols, amines, acids, ketones and aldehydes.

CYL506 Bioinorganic Chemistry
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): CYL503
Overlap with: CYL100 (5%)
Metal ions in biology: occurrence and function, active-site structure and function of metalloproteins and
metalloenzymes with various transition metal ions and ligand systems; oxygen binding properties of
heme and non-heme proteins, their coordination geometry and electronic structure.
Electron Transfer Proteins: Types of copper proteins and enzymes, mechanism of electron transport,
structure and bonding of plastocyanin, azurin. - Fe-S proteins and Rieske iron-sulfur proteins [2Fe-2S],
cytochromes and their comparisons.
Electron transport and energy metabolism: Photosynthesis (Photosystem I and II), Mn-cluster for
electron release.
Mobilization of iron: Siderophores; transport of iron: transferrin, storage of iron: Ferritin – hemosiderine.
Oxygen transport and storage: Hemoglobin - myoglobin - co-operativity effect, Hill coefficient and Bohr
Effect; hemerythrine - hemocyanine. characterization of O bound species by Raman and infrared
spectroscopic methods.
Small molecule activation: Nitrogen fixation and mechanism, hydrogenases. Oxygen activation: Cu and
Fe containing enzymes - representative synthetic models of heme and non-heme systems and
cytochrome P450, Cu-Zn-superoxide dismutase - Zn-containing enzymes - types of Mo-enzymes.
Metals in medicine: Vitamin B12 and its mechanisms of action, MRI contrast agents, radio-isotopes
(e.g., Tc & I) and therapeutic applications of cis-platin and Au complex. Toxicity of metals: Cd, Hg and
Cr toxic effects with specific examples.

CYL507 Chemistry of Main Group Elements
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): CYL401
Overlap with: NA
Basic introduction, physical properties of the main group elements, shapes and sizes of the main group
elements, structure and bonding in main group compounds including hypervalency and multiple bond.
Hydrogen and classical hydrogen bond, water, hydrates, hydrogen ions, metal hydrides, activation of
hydrogen complexes; alkali metals in liquid ammonia; boron, boranes, carboranes, borazines and
borates; allotropy of carbon; silane and polysilanes, silicones.
Polymers, silicates; compounds of nitrogen, activation of nitrogen, nitrogen fixation, hydrogen, halogen,
oxygen and nitrogen compounds of phosphorous; oxygen and singlet oxygen, ozone, complexes of
molecular oxygen; N-S compounds; sulphides, oxides and oxoacids of sulphur, chalcogenides and
polychalcogenides; halogens, polyhalides, interhalogen compounds, charge-transfer complexes of
Halogens; compounds of Xenon and other noble gases; Zintl compounds and homometallic
clusters.
Recent advances and their properties of various main group compounds, such as Group 1, Group 2,
and Group 13-18.

CYL508 Organic Photochemistry and Pericyclic reactions
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): CYL505
Overlap with: NA
Photochemistry: Basics principles of organic photochemistry - Reactivity of simple chromophores –
photochemistry of carbon centered radicals.
Photochemistry of Alkenes: Excited States of alkenes - photochemistry of alkene - geometrical
isomerisation - photosensitised geometrical isomerisation – photocycloaddition reactions of alkene-dipi-methane rearrangement - electron transfer mediated reactions of alkene.
Photochemistry of carbonyl compounds: Norrish type I and type II reactions – photochemical
cycloadditions- photochemistry of aromatic systems- electron transfer and nucleophile.
Introduction to Pericyclic Reaction. Cycloaddition reactions: Diels-Alder reaction; general features,
dienes, dienophiles, selectivity, intramolecular and intermolecular reactions, hetero-Diels Alder
reaction. 1,3-dipoIar GycIoaddition reactions; general features, dipoles, dipolarophiles. Cycloaddition
reactions; general features, selected examples.
Molecular rearrangements: Illustration of electron deficient and electron rich skeletal rearrangements
with examples; Sigmatropic rearrangements-Claisen and related rearrangements, CopeandoxyCoperearrangements;2,3-sigmatropicrearrangements and ene reaction.

CYL509 Molecular Spectroscopy and Computational Chemistry
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): CYL500
Overlap with: PHL509 (10%)
Rotational Spectroscopy: Rigid roto model for diatomic molecules, selection rules, intensity of rotational
transitions, role of nuclear spin, Isotopic substitution. Vibrational spectroscopy: Harmonic and anharmonic oscillators, Morse potential, mechanical and
electrical anharmonicity, selection rules. The determination of anharmonicity constant and equilibrium
vibrational frequency from fundamental and overtones.
Electronic transitions: Franck-Condon principle. Vertical transitions. Selection rules, parity, symmetry
and spin selection rules. Polarization of transitions. Fluorescence and phosphorescence.
Raman spectroscopy: Polarizability and selection rules for rotation and vibrational Raman spectra.
Perturbation theory: Time-dependent and time-independent perturbation theory with simple application
Atomic term symbols for atoms.
Conjugated pi-systems and Hückel theory.
Group Theory: Concept of groups, symmetry operations, and symmetry elements in different
molecules, matrix representations of symmetry operations, point groups, Great orthogonality theorem
and Character table.
Application of group theory to molecular orbital theory, molecular vibrations and vibrational
spectroscopy.

CYL510 Physical Organic Chemistry
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): CYL501
Overlap with: NA
Symmetry-adapted orbitals. Mixing rules and buildup approach to molecules and molecular complexes.
Energy surface for bond breaking and making, pre-reacting complex, transition state, activation-strain
analysis, Gibbs free energy profile for C-H activation using Pd-catalyst and also using Iodine(III).
Kinetic vs thermodynamic control of products, Curtin-Hammett principle, Hammond Postulate, isotope
effects. Examples of Curtin—Hammett paradigm for stereo control in organocatalysis, and
intramolecular cyclization.
Reactive intermediates: Carbocations, carbanions, carbenes, benzyne. Empirical scales for electronic,
steric, and solvent effects (dielectric constant), salt effects, ion pairs in solvolysis reaction,
stereoelectronic effects such as effect of anchimeric assistance on rate of the reaction.
Mechanism according to free-energy correlation and correspondence with theory of orbital interaction.
Linear free energy relationship, Yukawa-tsuno equation, Hammett and Taft equations with Illustrative
examples: hydrolysis of aryl ester, acetolysis substituted aryl brosylate.

CYL600 Advanced Organic Chemistry
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): CY504 and CY508
Overlap with: NA
Retrosynthesis: Basic principles and terminology of retrosynthesis, concepts of latent polarity,
umpolung, and synthetic equivalents, important functional group transposition and functional group
interconversions, important strategies of retrosysnthesis, synthesis of monofunctional, difunctional and
multifunctional group target molecules, synthesis of aromatic target molecules, concept of enzymatic
retrosynthsis.
Protecting groups: Protection and deprotection of hydroxy, carboxyl, carbonyl, carboxy amino groups
and carbon-carbon multiple bonds; chemo- and regioselective protection and deprotection, illustration
of protection and deprotection in organic synthesis. Construction of ring systems: Baldwin’s rules, methodolgies for the construction of three, four, five, six
and seven membered rings, medium and large rings, methods for ring contration, application in total
synthesis.
Target oriented synthesis: Scope and brief history of total synthesis, tactics, strategy and control in
organic synthesis, concept of semi-synthesis, linear, convergent, cascasde and diversity-oriented
synthesis, total synthesis of biologically active representative molecules.

CYL601 Organometallic Chemistry: Principles and Applications
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): CYL503
Overlap with: CYL100 (5%)
Definition, the first few organometallic complexes, thermodynamics and kinetics of organometallic
compounds, the 18-electron rule; Different types organometallic bonding: Metal- alkyls, aryls, hydrides,
organometallic bonding with multiple bonds, complexes of pi-bound ligands such as carbonyls,
phosphine complexes, carbenes, MO theory of organometallic complexes, isolobal analogy;
Fundamental reaction process: oxidative addition and reductive elimination; insertion and elimination;
ligand substitution processes, transmetallation, nucleophilic and electrophilic addition and abstraction;
Preparative and characterization methods: general methods for the preparation of organometallic
compounds and spectroscopic and analytical techniques for the elucidation of structure, properties and
reactivates; Synthetic Applications: Coupling reactions, cyclization reactions, addition reactions,
carbonylation, olefin oxidation, carbenes and activation reactions, hydrogenation, hydroformylation,
isomerization, metathesis and polymerization reactions. CO2 activation, C-H activation, C-C activation,
click catalysis, oxidation reaction.

CYL602 Interpretative Molecular Spectroscopy
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: NA
Mass spectrometry: the production and analysis of positive ions, molecular ions, application of isotopic
abundance measurements, fragmentation modes and rearrangement of ions. Mass spectra of certain
chemical classes.
Electronic spectroscopy (UV-visible, fluorescence and phosphorescence): Simple chromophoric
groups, conjugated and aromatic systems. Characteristic absorption of organic and inorganic
compounds.
Infrared spectroscopy: Characteristic group frequencies of organic and inorganic molecules.
Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy of compounds containing 1H,13C,19F and 31P nuclei.
Identification of organic and inorganic compounds using combination of spectral data.

CYL603 Chemistry of Heterocyclic Compounds and Natural Products
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): CYL501
Overlap with: NA
Heterocyclic Compounds: Introduction to heterocyclic compounds, importance of heterocycles in
medicine and materials, systematic nomenclature of heterocyclic compounds. Preparation, reactions
and chemical properties of three membered heterocyclic compounds with one and two hetero atom, four membered heterocyclic compounds with one hetero atom. Structure, synthesis and reactivity of
five and six membered heterocyclic compounds.
Aromatic heterocyclic compounds: Pyrrole, furan, thiophene, pyridine, quinoline, isoquinoline, indole,
etc. Named reactions of heterocyclic compound synthesis such as Fiest Benary furan synthesis, Knorr
and Paal-Knorr pyrrole synthesis, Barton-Zard reaction, Robinson-Gabriel synthesis, Hofmann-LofflerFreytag reaction, Hantzsch pyridine synthesis, Biginelli and Chichibabin reations.
Natural Products: Role of natural products in drug discovery, structure and chemical properties of
alkaloids, terpinoids, and steroids. Physio-chemical properties of amino acids, chemical synthesis of
peptides, properties of mono-and di-saccharides.

CYL605 Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) Spectroscopy and its Applications
3 Credits (2-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: CYL508 (5%); CYL602 (5%)
Principles of EPR - Presentation of the spectrum-EPR spectrum of hydrogen atom (first-order
treatment), g factors, Hyperfine splitting: nuclear spin (I = 1/2, 1, 3/2, 5/2) interaction with electron
spin, hyperfine coupling constants, EPR spectra of organic radicals (AA and AB type), EPR spectra
of heteronuclear compounds, McConnell's relation, Introduction to multi-electron systems: zero-field
splitting, multi-electron systems, Kramer’s degeneracy.
Applications of EPR spectra for inorganic compounds (Cu2+, Ni2+, Fe3+, V4+, Mn2+ and Cr3+and etc),
structure and geometry predictions, anisotropy in the hyperfine coupling constant. Characterization of
Metalloproteins. EPR Imaging.

CYL610 Solar Energy Harvesting Materials
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: NA
Light harvesting materials, Light mater interaction, the concept of diffusion length, exciton binding
energy, transport gap, mobility, lifetime and metal-semiconductor junction. Excited state electron
transfer kinetics.
Conjugated polymer-based systems and their synthesis and properties, donor-acceptor systems,
electron transfer mechanism, in organic systems, doping and band-gap engineering inorganic
semiconductors.
Dye, Quantum dot, and perovskite-based systems. Solar to value-added product generation using
such systems. Artificial photosynthesis, Hybrid semiconductors and composite semiconductors,
introduction to light to energy storage using hybrid and composite semiconductors. A comparison of
various classes of semiconductors-based solar cells with their working principle.