Physics 
PHL101 Physics for Engineers 4 Credits (3-1-0) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: NA Mechanics -generalized coordinates, Lagrangian and Hamiltonian formulation, simple, damped, forced –oscillations; Optics -interference, diffraction, polarization, LASER; Electromagnetism -Maxwell equation, dielectrics, metals, theory of radiation; Modern physics –atomic structure, quantum mechanics, photoelectric effect, relativity, nuclear physics; Astrophysics -Kepler’s problem, stars, white-dwarfs, neutron stars, black holes, geometry of the universe, Materials property -electrical, thermal, magnetic, mechanical properties.
PHP102 Physics Lab 1.5 Credits (0-0-3) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: NA Error Analysis, Newton rings, Bandgap of a semiconductor, Characteristics of a n-p-n transistor, Hall effect, Diffraction, Stefan’s law and Zener diode, Cathode Ray Oscilloscope, Gouy’s method: Measurement of the magnetic susceptibility.
PHL403 Mathematical Physics 3 Credits (3-0-0) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: NA Vector space, orthogonality, matrices, Cayley-Hamilton Theorem, eigenvalues, eigenvectors. Complex variable, Singularities, Taylor and Laurent series, residue theorem, contour integration; Fourier series, Fourier transformation, Laplace transformation. Special function: Gamma, Hermite, Bessel, Legendre, Laguerre and Green functions; Introduction of tensor and group theory, representation of O(N), SU(N).
PHL404 Electronics 3 Credits (3-0-0) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: NA Network theorems and related theories of electronic circuits/devices; application to simple circuits; p-n junction devices, diode, transistors; biasing schemes; small signal amplifiers; feedback; oscillators. Power supply; wave shaping circuits; Bipolar junction transistor: configurations, small signal amplifier, oscillators; JFET and MOSFET: characteristics, small signal amplifier. OP-AMP: Differential amplifiers; Op-Amp (741) circuits (amplifiers; scalar; adder; subtractors; comparator; logarithmic amplifiers; etc.); Number systems and their inter-conversion; Boolean algebra; Logic gates; De-Morgan's theorem. Logic Families: TTL, MOS and CMOS; Combinational Circuits: Adders, subtractors, Encoder, etc.; Sequential Circuits: Flip-flops, Registers, Counters, Memories; A/D and D/A conversion Microprocessor and microcontroller basics. 
PHL501 Classical Mechanics 3 Credits (3-0-0) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: NA Review of Newtonian mechanics, Lagrangian mechanics, generalized coordinates, constraints, principle of virtual work. Lagrange’s equation, calculus of variations, central forces, collisions, scattering small oscillations, anharmonic oscillators. perturbation theory, forced oscillators. Hamilton’s equations, phase space & phase trajectories, canonical transformations, Poisson brackets. HamiltonJacobi theory, rigid body dynamics, nonlinear dynamics; Special Theory of Relativity: Relativistic Kinematics, Mass Energy equivalence, Continuous System.
PHL502 Quantum Mechanics 3 Credits (3-0-0) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: PHLXXX, Physics for engineer (5%) Origins of quantum theory, Schrödinger equation, wave mechanics, one and three-dimensional problems, Harmonic and other potentials; hydrogen atom, general treatment of angular momentum; spin. Time Independent Perturbation Theory, Variational Methods, WKB Approximation Method, Time Dependent Perturbation Theory, Fermi’s Golden Rule. Scattering Theory: Scattering Amplitude and Cross Section. Born Approximation, Partial Wave Analysis, Optical Theorem, Hard-Sphere Scattering, Resonance Scattering from a Square Well Potential.
PHL505 Electrodynamics 3 Credits (3-0-0) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: NA Vector Analysis, Electrostatics: Coulomb’s law, Electric Field, Gauss’s law, Electric Potential, Poisson’s and Laplace equations, Boundary conditions, Work and Energy in Electrostatics, Conductors, Multipole expansion. Electric field in matter: Dielectrics, Polarization and Bound charge, Electric Susceptibility and Permittivity. Magnetostatics: Lorentz force, Biot-Savart law, Ampere’s law, Magnetic Vector potential, Boundary conditions, Multipole expansion. Magnetic field in matter: Magnetic materials, Magnetization and Bound currents, Ampere law in magnetized materials, Magnetic Susceptibility and Permeability. Electrodynamics: Faraday’s law, Self and mutual inductance. Maxwell's equations. Conservation laws: Continuity equation, Poynting theorem. Electromagnetic waves: Wave equations, Energy and momentum of Electromagnetic waves, Propagation in linear media, Reflection and transmission of Electromagnetic waves, Electromagnetic waves in conductor. Potentials and Field: Scalar and vector potential, Gauge transformations, Coulomb and Lorentz gauges.
PHP506 Electronics Laboratory 3 Credits (0-0-6) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: NA P-N junction diode characteristics, Study of diode circuit and power supply, Special diode (SCR and TRIAC) characteristics. Bipolar junction transistor (BJT) - characteristics, JFET characteristics, MOSFET characteristics, Study of Logic gates, Study of De Morgan’s Laws. Applications of Operational Amplifier.
PHL507 Statistical Mechanics 3 Credits (3-0-0) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: NA Classical Statistical Mechanics: Postulate of classical statistical mechanics, Liouville’s theorem, micro canonical ensemble, Derivation of equipartition theorem, classical ideal gas, Gibb’s Paradox. Canonical ensemble and energy fluctuation, grand canonical ensemble and density fluctuation, Equivalence of canonical and grand canonical ensemble. Quantum Statistical Mechanics: The density matrix, ensembles in quantum statistical mechanics; Ideal gas in micro-canonical and grand canonical ensembles; Equation of state for ideal Fermi gas, Theory of white dwarf stars. Ideal Bose Gas, Photons and Planck’s law, Phonons, Bose-Einstein condensation; Phase Transition: Thermodynamic description of phase transitions, phase transitions of second kind, Discontinuity of specific heat, change in symmetry in a phase transition of second kind. Ising model: Definition of Ising model, One Dimensional Ising model; Ideal Bose Gas, Photons and Planck’s law Phonons, Bose- Einstein condensation; Thermodynamics description of phase transitions, phase transitions of second kind, Discontinuity of specific heat, change in symmetry in a phase transition of second kind.
PHL508 Solid State Physics 3 Credits (3-0-0) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: NA Crystal structure: Miller indices and reciprocal lattice, Bragg and von Laue diffraction, structure factor; Lattice vibration and thermal properties: harmonic approximation, monatomic and diatomic lattices, Brillouin zone, density of states, acoustic and optical modes, phonons, crystal momentum, Debye model of specific heat, thermal expansion, thermal conductivity. Free electron theory: Fermi gas, specific heat, Ohm’s law, magnetoresistance, thermal conductivity; Band theory: Bloch theorem, nearly free electron model, motion of electron in energy bands, effective mass; Semiconductor: Intrinsic and extrinsic semiconductors, mobility and electrical conductivity, Fermi level, Hall effect. Magnetism: Diamagnetism, Hund’s rules, Lande g-factor, quantum theory of paramagnetism, Pauli paramagnetism, exchange interaction, ferromagnetism, hysteresis; Superconductivity: Meissner effect, London equations, type-I and type-II superconductors; Ginzburg-Landau theory, outlines of BCS theory.
PHL509 Nuclear and Particle Physics 3 Credits (3-0-0) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: NA Ground state of Deuteron, Mesons and nuclear force field (Field theory of Nuclear forces); Liquid drop model and Weissacker’s mass formula, Shell model of the nucleus, Fermi gas model Single particle shell model, Collective model of nucleus, rotational motion of the nucleus, vibration of spherical Nuclei; Description of nuclear Reactions, Q-value, derivation of elastic and reaction cross section, description by partial wave analysis, Resonances, Breit-winger one level formula; Accelerators and Detectors. The Standard model of particle physics, particle classification, Spin and parity determination, Isospin, strangeness, hypercharge, and baryon number, lepton number, Gell-Mann-Nishijima Scheme, Quarks in hadrons: Meson and baryon octet, Elementary ideas of SU(3) symmetry, charmonium, charmed mesons and B mesons, Quark spin and colour.
PHL510 Atomic and Molecular Physics 3 Credits (3-0-0) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: NA Review of one and two-electron atoms; Many electron atoms: central field approximation, ThomasFermi model, Hartree-Fock and self-consistent field methods, Hund's rule, L-S and j-j coupling, Equivalent and nonequivalent electrons, Spectroscopic terms, Lande interval rule. Interaction with Electromagnetic fields: Zeeman, Paschen Back and Stark effects; Hyperfine structure and isotope shift, selection rules; Lamb shift; Molecular spectra: rotational, vibrational, electronic, Raman and Infra-red spectra of diatomic molecules; Hund's rule, Frank–Condon principle. Molecular structure: molecular potential, Born-Oppenheimer approximation, diatomic molecules, electronic angular momenta; Modern developments: optical cooling and trapping of atoms, Bose- Einstein condensation, Introduction of LASER physics.
PHP511 General Physics Laboratory 3 Credits (0-0-6) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: NA Gamma Ray spectrometer, GM Counter, Frank Hertz Experiment. Optical Fiber characterization, Michelson Interferometer. Zeeman effect, Magnetic Hysterisis loop, Electron Spin resonance. Magnetoresistance using Four Probe Method. Confocal Raman Spectrometer-1, Confocal Raman Spectrometer-2.
PHL601 Computational Physics 3 Credits (3-0-0) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: NA C Programming language: Algorithms, flow charts, constants, expressions, conditional statements, loops, arrays, logical expressions, control statements, functions, structures, pointers, bit operation, files in C. Solving problems using C programming. Numerical Analysis: Interpolation by Lagrange method, Numerical solution of simple algebraic equation by Newton- Raphson method, Least Square fit using rational functions. Numerical integration: Trapezoidal method, Simpson's method, Romberg integration, Gauss quadrature method, Eigenvalues and eigenvectors of a matrix, Solution of linear homogeneous equations, Trace of a matrix, Matrix inversion, Solution of ordinary differential equation by Runge-Kutta Method, Introductory Monte Carlo techniques.
PHL602 Astrophysics and Cosmology 3 Credits (3-0-0) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: PH660 (10%) Astrophysics: basics, spectra, radiative transfer, stars, end-states of stars (white dwarfs, Chandrasekhar's mass limit, neutron stars, supernovae, black holes), quasars, gamma ray bursts, astrophysical fluids& plasmas, applications to stars/galaxies and the Universe. Einstein’s relativity: special relativity, equivalence principle, basics of general relativity. Cosmology: redshift, FRLW models of the Universe, expansion, Hubble's law, the early Universe, bigbang model, inflation, nucleosynthesis, matter and radiation dominated era. Dark matter, dark energy, cosmic microwave background, baryon acoustic oscillations, formation of galaxies and stars, current forefront of research, supermassive black holes, first stars, epoch of reionization, 21 cm cosmology, N-body simulations.
PHL604 Particle Physics 3 Credits (3-0-0) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: NA The Standard model of particle physics, particle classification, fermions and bosons, lepton flavors, quark flavors, electromagnetic, weak and strong processes, Spin and parity determination, lsospin, strangeness, hypercharge, and baryon number, lepton number, Gell- Mann-Nishijima Scheme. Quarks in hadrons: Meson and baryon octet, Elementary ideas of SU(3) symmetry, charmonium, charmed mesons and B mesons, Quark spin and colour. Dirac equation, scattering processes of spin1/2 particles (Feynmans rules as thumb rule). Propagators Current-current interactions, weak interaction, Fermi theory Gauge symmetries, spontaneous symmetry breaking, Higgs mechanism Electroweak interaction, Glashow-SalamWeinberg model Introduction to QCD, structure of hadrons (form factors, structure functions), parton model, Deep inelastic scattering.
PHL607 Experimental and Measurement Techniques 3 Credits (3-0-0) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: NA Introduction to structure properties, basic crystallography, Normal and Reciprocal lattice, X-ray diffraction, Ewald Sphere; X-ray Characterization: X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique and analysis methods. Electron Microscopy: Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS), Electron Backscattered Diffraction (EBSD), Electron Probe Microanalysis (EPMA), Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) and diffraction pattern analysis. Surface Probe Microscopy: Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM), Scanning Tunnelling Microscopy (STM); Electron Emission spectroscopies: X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS), Auger Electron Spectroscopy (AES), Ultraviolet Photoelectron Spectroscopy (UPS). Vibrational Spectroscopy: Raman Spectroscopy, Infra-red Spectroscopy, FTIR; Optical Techniques: Absorbance, Fluorescence, and Photoluminescence spectroscopy; Resonance techniques: Nuclear Magnetic Spectroscopy (NMR), Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR); Chromatography: gas and liquid; Time of Flight (TOF) secondary ion mass spectroscopy. 
PHL609 Advanced Quantum Mechanics 3 Credits (3-0-0) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: PH600 (15%) Unit-I: Klein-Gordon equation and its drawbacks, Dirac equation, Properties of Dirac matrices, nonrelativistic reduction of Dirac equation, magnetic moment, Darwins term, Spin-Orbit coupling, Poincare transformation, Lorentz group, Covariant form of Dirac equation, Bilinear covariants, Gordon decomposition. Unit-II: Free particle solution of Dirac equation, Projection operators for energy and spin, Physical interpretation of free particle solution, Zitter bewegung, Hole theory, Charge conjugation, space reflection and time reversal symmetries of Dirac equation. Continuous systems and fields. Transition from discrete to continuous systems, Lagrangian and Hamiltonian Formulations, Noether's theorem. Unit-III: Second quantization, Equal Time Commutators, Normal Ordering, covariant quantization of electromagnetic field, Quantization of scalar, electromagnetic, and Dirac fields, Propagators for scalar, spinor and vector fields.
PHL610 Science and Technology of Thin Films 3 Credits (3-0-0) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: NA Introduction to thin films and their relevance. Introduction to vacuum science and Technology, gas transport and pumping systems, pressure measurements. Physics of thin film deposition, adsorption, surface deposition, nucleation, growth and structure development, surface structure, role of surfaces, epitaxial growth, lattice mismatch, strain, and growth modes. Various thin film fabrication techniques: Thermal evaporation, Knudsen cell, Sputtering, E-beam evaporation, Atomic layer deposition, electrospinning, dry and wet etching, Chemical vapor deposition (CVD), sol-gel, Electrodeposition, Spray pyrolysis, spin-coating, and Langmuir-Blodgett technique, etc. Phase transformations in thin films, Overview of various properties of thin films and their relation to their microstructures.
PHL611 Applied Optics 3 Credits (3-0-0) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: NA Brief history and basics of light: wave motion, electromagnetic waves, photons. Geometrical optics: Reflection, Refraction, Total internal reflection, lenses, prism. Physical optics: waves and wavefront, Coherence, Interference, Diffraction, Polarization, Scattering. Fourier optics: Fourier Transformation, Diffraction Theory, Propagation of light waves. Optical systems: Human Eye, Microscopes, Telescope, Laser, Light Emitting Diodes, Camera, Spectrometers, Spatial light modulators. Applications of optical techniques: Interferometers, Laser in industry, Optical imaging, Singular optics, Optical information processing, Fiber optics communication.