Electronics and Communication Engineering 
ECL101 Basic Electronics Engineering 4 Credits (3-0-2) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: NA Semiconductor Diode, V-I characteristics of Diode, Half-Wave and Full-Wave Rectifier Circuits. Transistors: Bipolar Junction Transistor, MOSFET: Biasing, Small Signal model, Amplifiers Operational Amplifiers: Ideal Op-Amp, Application of Op-Amp; Diode Characteristics and applications (rectifiers/clipping). Transistors with at least one application (amplification/switching). Op-Amp: Analog to digital converter implementation; Logic Gates and Combinational Circuits: Number Systems and Binary Codes, Boolean Algebra and Logic Gates, DeMorgan’s Theorems, Sum-of Product and Product-of-Sum Forms, Algebraic Simplification, Karnaugh-Map Method, Combinational Logic Circuits, Binary Half and Full adder-subtractor, Adders, Comparators, Multiplexers, Decoders/encoders, Parity Generator-Checker; Basic Combinational Circuits. Synchronous and Ripple Counters. (Done using discrete components); Communications: Analog and Digital communication introduction and implementation. Frequency modulation and its circuit using discrete electrical/electronic components, Digital communication using Visible Light Communication (concept of digital communications, using parity bits); FM Demodulator hardware, FM Demodulator in USRP using gnuradio, Visible light communication using Arduino.
ECL501 Computer Communications 3 Credits (2-0-2) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: CSL351 (25%) Communication Networks basics. Circuit Switched Networks. Switching Concepts. Layered Architecture, Introduction to DLL Layer. MAC Protocols – Ethernet, Wireless LAN, PON. Network Layer – IP; Routing Algorithms and Associated Protocols; Transport Layer and its performance modelling; Introduction to Queuing. Application of Queuing theory for Design of Circuit Networks. Performance analysis of CSMA CD, CSMA CA; Hands-on with Python network programming.
ECL502 Advanced Digital Communication 3 Credits (3-0-0) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: NA Digital modulation, Baseband signaling and pulse shaping, Passband Pulse- and QuadratureAmplitude Modulation, Multi-carrier modulation, Maximum-likelihood detection, Whitened matched filter, Viterbi algorithm, Probability of error, Linear equalization, Decision-feedback equalization, Informations theory- source coding, channel coding, channel capacity; Introduction to Digital Communication, Sampling, Quantization, PCM, and Delta Modulation; Probability and Random Process; Channels and Their Models; Information Theory; Bandpass Signal Representation; Digital Modulation Techniques: Pulse Amplitude Modulation, Demodulation Techniques for PAM Signals; PSK (Phase Shift Keying), PSK and QAM (Quadrature Amplitude Modulation); Some Basic Linear Algebrafor Digital Modulation; Frequency Shift Keying (FSK), Pulse Position Modulation (PPM); Biorthogonal Signals, Demodulation; Demodulation: PAM, PSK, QAM, FSK, PPM, etc.; Digital Modulation Techniques: Eye Diagram, Mapper; Calculation of Probability of Error for PAM and Binary PAM; Calculation of Probability of Error for QAM, FSK, and PPM; Calculation of Probability of Error for Biorthogonal Signal Sets, Upper Bound on Probability of Error; Equalizers; Source Coding: Introduction, Huffman Code; Source Coding: Kraft Inequality, Optimal Codes; Source Coding: Blockwise Source Coding, Shannon-Fano-Elias Code; Source Coding: Arithmetic Coding, Lempel-Ziv Code; Channel Coding; Fundamentals of OFDM; Conclusion.
ECL503 Digital IC Design 3 Credits (3-0-0) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: NA Introduction, MOS Transistor Basics and Theory; Threshold voltage, MOSFET I-V and C-V characteristics, characterization of resistive, capacitive elements of MOS devices; Logic implementation by CMOS; Static CMOS inverter and its Transfer characteristics. Transistor sizing, Technology scaling, Gate delay and power models; Static and Dynamic characteristics, Noise margins, Interconnect basics and crosstalk; Logical effort, Electrical effort, intrinsic/extrinsic delay; Circuit topologies and transistor sizing for optimal delay and power; Circuit Styles: Static CMOS circuits, Pass transistor logic, Transmission gate, Dynamic CMOS, Dual-rail-domino logic, Pseudo MOS logic and other families; Combination circuit design with various architectures; Sequential circuit design, Basic understanding, design and timing analysis of sequential circuits like Flip- Flops and Latches; Time borrowing and pipelining; Circuit pitfalls, Clocking techniques, and Layout design basics; Memory design, EEPROM, DRAM, SRAM and sense amplifiers; IOs,Low Power Techniques, Design methods and tools, CMOS testing, System Design Examples; Conclusion.
ECL504 Semiconductor Devices 3 Credits (3-0-0) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: NA Physics of Semiconductor Devices: Introduction of fundamentals, evolution and uniqueness of Semiconductor Technology; Column IV, III-V and II-VI, semiconductor materials and compounds. Basic fabrication steps; Device at thermal and electrical equilibrium, concept of electrons and holes, intrinsic/ extrinsic Semiconductors, carrier concentration, effective mass Fermi level, energy band models and direct/indirect semiconductors; Concept of the Excess carriers, generation and recombination, Injection level, doping, lifetime, scattering, mobility, conductivity, scattering and temperature dependency. Analysis of Semiconductor Devices: Analysis of the semiconductor devices; Drift/diffusion and thermal current; Device modeling using basic transport/ continuity equations and various approximations. PN Junction Diodes and Hetero junction devices: Device at equilibrium, Diode I-V characteristics, forward and reverse bias of the device and mathematical modelling of full operation of the PN junction; Avalanche/ zener breakdown, capacitance modeling, Small-signal equivalent circuit and switching characteristics; Schottky/ ohmic contacts and other type of the diodes like varactor, LED, zener, and Schottky diode. Bipolar Junction Transistor (BJT): History, Device structures and fabrication, Transistor action and amplification, Common base and common emitter DC characteristics; breakdown operation, base width modulation, Small-signal Equivalent circuit vs Ebers Moll model, SPICE model and circuit level applications of the transistors; MOSFET: Metal Oxide Field Effect Transistor History, Devicestructures and fabrication, MOS Junction, Mos capacitance, equivalent resistance, C-V characteristics, threshold voltage calculation; I-V characteristics of the MOSFET and second order effects like body effect, channel length modulation, velocity saturation. IDBL, GIDL, and mobility degradation; Common source DC characteristics Small-signal equivalent circuit SPICE level-1 model Differences between a MOSFET and a BJT, Junction FET and MESFET 2. State-of-the-Art Technology and summary of the course: Introduction of FINFETs, LDMOS, Polysilicon emitter transistors, Heterojunctions, 2D electron gas, band alignment, SiGe HBTs, SOI MOSFETs, Floating body effect, Source/drain engineering, Brief introduction to HEMTs, MESFETs and MODFETs; Nanowire Electronics, challenges and future trends and Conclusion.
ECL511 Machine Learning Applications for Wireless Communications 3 Credits (3-0-0) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: Old EE522 (100%) Introduction to Machine Learning: Overview of supervised, un-supervised, reinforcement learning. Introduction to Communication Systems: Application of ML in various OSI layers of a communication system. Use of ML in Real time schedulers. Connections between signal processing, adaptive filtering and machine learning connections between Weiner filtering and regression techniques in ML, filtering techniques such as FIR, IIR and the deep neural Network architectures such as CNN, RNN. Supervised Learning and its applications in wireless systems. Applications in modulation classification, adaptive modulation and coding mechanisms for wireless systems, etc. Un-supervised Learning and its applications in wireless systems. Use of principal component in massive MIMO system design, auto encoders in wireless communications transceiver design, etc. Connections between wireless communications and machine learning. Hidden Markov model and Viterbi algorithm in convolutional decoders.
ECL599 Wireless Communication Security with SDRs 3 Credits (3-0-0) Prerequisite(s): None Overlap with: EE515 (50%) Introduction to Wireless Communications using SDRS: Physical layer security schemes, Spreading techniques and their application in jamming-resilient communication. Security analysis of simple systems: Key-Fobs. Bluetooth Security analysis: Protocol Description followed by sniffer analysis. WiFi Security analysis: Protocol Description followed by sniffer analysis. LTE Security analysis: Protocol Description followed by sniffer analysis. Study of attack models for selective protocols.
ECL604 Signal Processing Algorithms to DSP Architectures 3 Credits (3-0-0) Prerequisite(s): EE101 or equivalent Overlap with: EE604 (100%) Review: Digital systems, DSP, computer architecture. DSP system models; quality metrics and bounds; number representations. Implementation: dedicated hardware; transforms; resource shoring; Scheduling: time and resource bounds; allocation, binding, scheduling, techniques.Architectures: Programmable systems: FSMs and microprograms; instruction extensions; peripheral accelerators. Memory and communication systems: bus structures; DMA; networks-on-chip. Specialized architectures: CORDIC; GPU. Applications in Physical layer of cellular systems Introduction