Liberal Arts
LAL100 Introduction to Communication Skills
2 Credits (1-1-0)
Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: NA
Barriers to communication: Basic concepts – Communication Models; Components of communication:
Rhetoric and Argumentation Models and Strategies; Strategies for reading: Reading Methods,
Skimming, Scanning, Intensive, and Extensive; Towards careful enunciation: Basics of phonetics;
Techniques, common pitfalls; Making presentations: Public Speaking vs Presentations – Presentation
styles; Structure and content, Persuasive Speech – Non- verbal communication; Handling group
discussions: Types of group discussions, Basic structure; Time Management – Strategies; Writing for
technical purposes: Fundamentals of Technical Writing – Types of Documents; Structure and Format
– Common Pitfalls; Communication for workplaces: Etiquettes of Professional Communication –
Situations at Workplace; Communication Ethics.

LAL101 Introduction to Finance
1 Credits (1-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: NA
Risk and Return; Time Value of Money and Net Present Value; Asset Pricing Models: CAPM and APT;
Modern Portfolio Theory and Diversification; Bonds and Interest Rates; Derivatives: Futures and
Options.

LAN102 Speaking & Writing Skills
0 Credits (0-0-2)
Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: NA
Recognising competencies: language phobia – everyday language – dismantling preconceptions;
Learning words: commonly used words – word associations – idioms; Developing speaking skills:
conversing – extempore; Language through literature: reading short stories – reading essays – reading
op-eds; Writing skills: sentence formation – paragraphing – composition; Learning through
performance: group discussion – skits.

LAN103 Professional Ethics
0 Credits (1-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: NA
Understanding Ethics: definitions and theories; Code of Conduct: honesty – integrity – rights and
duties; Work ethics: teamwork –ethical decision-making – conflicts of interest; Research ethics:
accountability – confidentiality – consent; Social responsibility: civic responsibilities – environmental
accountability – technology and its impact.

LAL201 Microeconomics
1 Credits (1-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: LA322 (60%), LA346 (10%)
Introduction to microeconomics-scarcity, choice and opportunity cost. Demand and supply analysisbasic concepts, utility, indifference curves, consumer surplus, price elasticity of demand. Production
analysis-factors of production, Law of variable proportions, returns to scale. Cost analysis-types of
cost, short run and long run cost, revenue function, marginal revenue. Market structure- perfect
competition, monopoly, imperfect competition and oligopoly.

LAL221 Indian Writing in English
2 Credits (2-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: LA302 (100%)
Introduction to IWE: ‘Indianness’ in IWE and its interpretations, tracing the beginnings, literary Phases.
Nation and Literary history: Pre-independent literature, Nationalism, Gandhi, nationalist ideals, partition
Society and Caste: Literature of 1950s, Representation of social issues, Problematising caste in
literature
Gender and Sexuality: Women in fiction, the gender question, identity.
The resurgence: IWE in the 1980s, Indian fiction as postcolonial literature, regionalism, diaspora.
The contemporary: Postmillennial literature, Commercial fiction, Metro reads, Urbanisation, emerging
trends.

LAL226 Experiencing the Indian University
1 Credits (1-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: LA353 (100%)
Campus cultures: Universities – institutions, Competition: Anxiety – Friendship, Caste: Meritocracy –
reservations.

LAL247 Applied Positive Psychology
1 Credits (1-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): LAL246
Overlap with: LA365 (100%)
Meaning and purpose of applied positive psychology, Theories in applied positive psychology and
character strengths- Learned optimism -PERMAH theory- LIFE Model- versions of character strengths,
Characteristics of the mind that lead us to move in negative spirals- counteracting these cognitive
biases, Internet based interventions and their effects - Techniques and problems related to online
interventions - how to make them feasible and effective, Gratitude and closure- introduction to open
memories— reframing process— grateful reappraisal, Culture and subjective well-beinginterdependent self-construal and independent self-construal— identifying the self in the culturestrategies to use these to improve subjective well-being, Buffering and building mental health—
integrated findings on physical health, organizational health, and inter-personal processes- critique and
future directions.

LAN249 Introduction to Understanding Psychological Disorder
2 Credits (2-0-0)

Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: NA
Understanding Ethics: definitions and theories; Code of Conduct: honesty – integrity – rights and
duties; Work ethics: teamwork –ethical decision-making – conflicts of interest; Research ethics:
accountability – confidentiality – consent; Social responsibility: civic responsibilities – environmental
accountability – technology and its impact.

LAL252 Introduction to Stress and Coping
2 Credits (2-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: NA
Stress: Meaning and nature of stress, types of stress: Stress, Distress, eustress. Physiological
response to stress, Hans Seyle’s General Adaptation Syndrome, Transactional theory of stress. Source
of Stress: Internal factors, External factors, Systemic factors. Impact of Stress: Physical, Emotional and
Behavioural level.
Coping: Meaning and definition. Types of coping: A) Adaptive coping styles- Confrontive coping,
Planful problem solving, seeking social support, accepting responsibility, positive reappraisal; B)
Maladaptive coping styles: Distancing, Escape-Avoidance, Denial, Mental Disengagement.
Stress Management techniques:
Managing stress through physical skills: Simple Breathing Exercise: Deep Breathing, Exhalation
Breathing, Restful Sleep, Pranayama and Yoga, Meditation, Progressive Relaxation.
Managing stress through mental skills: Guided Imagery, Ventilate your Feelings, Irrational Thought
Control, Reaching the Point of Satiation, The Method of Thought Substitution.
Stress Management at the Behavioural Level: SMART Goals, Develop Positive Disposition, Reorientation to Work, Countering the Stress of Indecisiveness, Identification and Monitoring of Stress.

LAL731 Advanced Positive Psychology
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: LA702 (100%), LAL247 (5%)
Introduction: Medical model and its differences with the strengths model. Shift from the traditional deficit
approach to the strengths approach.
Historical and philosophical foundations both Western and Eastern.
Determinants of well-being- research, implications and areas to explore the study of Strengths: different
strength classifications with focus on VIA (three/four strengths in detail).
The role of negative in positive psychology: charting the domain of uneasy but necessary emotions
and experiences- resilience – post traumatic growth.
Positive Health- research and practice, effect of interventions.
Issues in Assessment of well-being: Tools and their standardization, methodological constraints,
accepted physiological and psychological indicators.
Prospects, practices and prescriptions for attainment of well-being- Criticism and prospects of positive
psychology - practice in clinical, organizational, health, and teaching.

LAL733 Statistical Analysis
3 Credits (3-0-0)

Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: MA509 (15%), MA513 (30%)
Unit1: Descriptive statistics
Concept of Statistics, Types: Descriptive and Inferential Statistics, Parametric and nonparametric
Statistics, Level of measurement: nominal, ordinal, interval and ratio, Frequency distribution, Measures
of Central tendency, Measures of Variability, Normal Distribution.
Unit 2: Inferential statistics
Correlation and Regression: basic aS5umptions; Correlation methods: Karl Pearson's product moment
correlation, bi-serial, point-bi-serial, partial, canonical, and multiple correlation Spearman‘s rank
correlation; Regression tests: simple linear regression, multiple line regression, non-linear regression,
and logistic regression, mediation and moderation analysis; t-test: Independent, paired & one sample
test; Analysis of Variance: one-way, two-way, and repeated measures ANOVA, ANCOVA, MANOVA
MANCOVA; simple effects, main effect, and interaction effect; Post-hoc testing: LSD, Tuke HSD,
Scheffe, Neuman—Keuls test, Protected ‘t-test: Some non-parametric tests: chi-square test, MannWhitney U test, Kruskal Wallis H and median test, Wilcoxon sign test, Friedman.
Other: Cluster analysis, principal components analysis, path analysis; structural equation modelling;
Meta-analysis; Statistical power of a test; Estimation of effect size; Analysis skills of SPSS, AMOS &
jamovi (open source software).
Unit-3: Test construction
Scaling methods: Theories- Classical test theory, item response theory; Steps in test construction,
Standard error of measurement
Reliability& Validity: Test-retest-alternate forms-split half, Cronbach's alpha-KR 20-inter scorer
reliabilities, content-criterion (predictive and concurrent)-construct (convergent and discriminant)
validities, factors affecting reliability and validity.
Item writing: General guidelines, types of items; Item analysis: Item difficulty (method of judgment,
empirical method), Item discrimination (test of significance, correlational technique), Item
characteristic curve, Item validity (factor analysis- exploratory, confirmatory, discriminant analysis);
Norms development.

LAL734 Allied Health Studies
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: NA
Health: Knowledge and understandings
Meaning and definition of Health, determinants of health, strategies that influence health,
frameworks, health measurements, health equity, Global burden of disease and risk factors, Maternal
and child health issues, biomedical vs biopsychosocial model, programs — solutions to global health
problems, Sustainable Development Goal.
Social, Behavioral factors and Health:
What is Belief, attitude and value, the relationship between beliefs, attitudes and values, Influence of
beliefs, attitudes, values and norms on decision making of the health behaviour, theories and models
of beliefs, attitudes, values and behaviour change.
Diseases: Prevention, control and management of diseases
Prevention, control and management of Non-communicable Diseases, Communicable Diseases,
Neglected tropical diseases, waterborne diseases, vaccine preventable diseases.
Health Programme, Policy and Planning:

Health policy, process and planning, Programme planning and evaluation of public health
programmes, Translating research into policy and health advocacy, Current issues in Health Policy:
National and global perspective, Role of non-governmental organizations in health care.

LAL735 Culture and the study of human strengths
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Prerequisite(s): None
Overlap with: NA
Introduction to human strengths and different strength classifications- Gallup, Clifton and Seligman
and Peterson classifications. Eastern and Western perspectives on strengths- value systems,
orientation to time and thought processes. Identification of strengths — methods and tools.
Understanding the debate on culture free and culturally embedded research and practice of strengths
— individual case studies.

